README.md, before:

# OndraKEYBOARD (Work in progress state!)

 Keyboard replica for the famous czechoslovak home computer [TESLA Ondra SPO186](http://www.ondraspo186.8u.cz/ "Tento web se zabývá československým počítačem Tesla Ondra SPO 186")
 

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/OndraKEYBOARD_potisk_v1_angle.jpg)
> OndraKEYBOARD replica of Tesla TX522xxx keyboard (real photo of early build from Martin8bity.cz)

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/OndraComputer.jpg/1920px-OndraComputer.jpg)
> Czechoslovak home computer Tesla Ondra SPO186 - introduced in 1985

### Features

- Opensource hardware
- Identical dimensions
- Similar mechanical properties (key force and displacement)
- Modern high grade microswitches E-SWITCH with rubber pin
- Durable
- Acceptable cost around 400CZK for switches
- Designed for home 3D printing
- Designed to buy parts on TME.eu in one banch
- PCB is usable as replacement of original mebrane to original keyboard with some modification

### Build steps

1. Print all the CAD files using your printer (FDM or SLA), the keycaps number is 40
2. Activate the ironing on keycaps is recommended for FDM print
3. The body should be printed on rough printplate to obtain the desired surface like original
4. Insert the M2.5 thread inserts into the body (2pcs)
5. Recommended material is ASA or PETG. PLA is an easy option, but not tested for long term use
6. Solder all microswitches to PCB
7. Solder the flat cable to the PCB and bend to 90 degrees
8. On the end of the flat cable solder the pinheader
9. Insert the keycaps to the body
10. Insert the PCB
11. Secure the PCB using the screws
12. Select the technology for keycaps print - professional print, DIY decals, Rub-On Stickers and paint, etc..
13. Done, enjoy, share...

### Recommended parts list (TME.eu)

- 40pc Microswitches - E-SWITCH TL3145AF180QJ (Symbol TME: TL3145AF180QJ)
- 20pc Screws - BOSSARD B14X4/BN13577 (Smybol TME: B14X4/BN13577)
- 2pc  Inserts - BOSSARD 1386735 (Symbol TME: B2.5/BN1054)


### More photos

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20160958.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20161455.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20161424.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Klavesnice1.jpg)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Klavesnice2.jpg)

![](https://www.oldcomp.cz/download/file.php?id=19486&mode=view)

![](https://www.oldcomp.cz/download/file.php?id=19485&mode=view)

### License

MIT license

Commit message:

Final design
Updated to final design, including the 3d printed labels.

README.md, after:

# OndraKEYBOARD (Work in progress state!)

 Keyboard replica for the famous czechoslovak home computer [TESLA Ondra SPO186](http://www.ondraspo186.8u.cz/ "Tento web se zabývá československým počítačem Tesla Ondra SPO 186")
 
![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/OndraKEYBOARD_3D_potisk.jpg)
> OndraKEYBOARD replica of Tesla TX522xxx keyboard (real photo of complete manual multicolour 3D print on Prusa MINI+ including labels)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/OndraKEYBOARD_back.jpg)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/OndraKEYBOARD_potisk_v1_angle.jpg)
> OndraKEYBOARD replica of Tesla TX522xxx keyboard (real photo of early build from Martin8bity.cz, laser printed labels)

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/OndraComputer.jpg/1920px-OndraComputer.jpg)
> Czechoslovak home computer Tesla Ondra SPO186 - introduced in 1985

### Features

- Free to use hardware
- Identical dimensions
- Similar mechanical properties (key force and displacement)
- Modern high grade microswitches E-SWITCH with rubber pin
- Durable
- Acceptable cost around 400CZK for switches
- Designed for home 3D printing
- Designed to buy parts on TME.eu in one banch
- PCB is usable as replacement of original mebrane to original keyboard with some modification

### Build steps

1. Print the buttons stp files using your printer one (without 3D printed labels) or two colors (3D printed labels with 0.25mm nozzle)
2. The keycaps should be printed upside-down with supports
3. The body should be printed on rough printplate to obtain the desired surface like original with your default nozzle (0.4mm)
4. Insert the M2.5 thread inserts into the body (2pcs) using hot end soldering iron pushing to inserts
5. Recommended material is ASA or PETG. PLA is also good enough.
6. Solder all microswitches to PCB (you can omit two center switches on space button)
7. Solder the flat cable to the PCB and bend to 90 degrees
8. On the end of the flat cable solder the pinheader
9. Insert the keycaps to the body
10. Insert the PCB
11. Secure the PCB using the screws
12. Select the technology for keycaps print - professional print, DIY decals, Rub-On Stickers and paint, etc..
13. Done, enjoy, share...

### How to print two-color buttons on Prusa MINI+ 3D printer

1. Recommended filament PLA Spectrum, colors Grey, Light Grey, Arctic White, Black
2. Insert the 0.25mm nozzle to printer
3. Use GCode or slice it by yourself (check all the changes on the PrusaSlicer project file)
4. Critical setting is the Z-axis settings, too much low will affect the sharpness and details in labels, too high affects the finished surface or can cause the print failure
5. Use default PLA teperatures (yes, 60degC on plate even for Spectrum filament)
6. Insert the body colour filament and start print
6. After a while, printer will want to change filament, change it to label colour, clean the nozzle and remove residue. Insert piece of paper on the first print layer and let the printer to "smudge" the nozzle against the paper, it is quick, but this method fixes the unwanted blobs on first layer. Then labels will be printed and again, change the body colour back when the printer wants it and leave it to finish the job



### Recommended parts list (TME.eu)

- 40pc Microswitches - E-SWITCH TL3145AF180QJ (Symbol TME: TL3145AF180QJ)
- 20pc Screws - BOSSARD B14X4/BN13577 (Smybol TME: B14X4/BN13577)
- 2pc  Inserts - BOSSARD 1386735 (Symbol TME: B2.5/BN1054)


### More photos

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20160958.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20161455.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Sn%C3%ADmek%20obrazovky%202024-07-22%20161424.png)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Klavesnice1.jpg)

![](https://github.com/72ka/OndraKEYBOARD/blob/main/Images/Klavesnice2.jpg)

![](https://www.oldcomp.cz/download/file.php?id=19486&mode=view)

![](https://www.oldcomp.cz/download/file.php?id=19485&mode=view)

### License

MIT license
